---
layout: post
title: .NET 6 vs .NET 4.8 GC stats - ~64% shorter max GC pause times (due to 1 letter removed in runtime)
---

Recently I [tweeted about performance
improvements](https://twitter.com/nietras1/status/1462714385772724226?s=20) we
are seeing from migrating an industrial machine learning application (desktop)
from .NET Framework 4.8 to .NET 6 which got more likes than any blog post I've
made before. Additionally, Alex Yakunin's blog post on [.NET 6 vs .NET 5: up to
40% speedup!](https://alexyakunin.medium.com/net-6-vs-net-5-up-to-40-speedup-ceca9112d298)
got some hacker news love, so I thought I'd give the crowd what it wants and
turn the tweets into a quick blog post. 😉

The application in question is used for inspection of products on a conveyor
belt and the sorting of these with the following characteristics:

 * Connected to a dozen cameras and processes about ~1 GB/s worth of images with
   ~1000 inference/s. 
 * Uses digital IO to control "latches" that sort out products. 
 * Sorting has to be performed with a certain precision, which means
   latency/jitter caused by GC pauses is an issue. 

Therefore, the application is highly optimized with special focus on managed
heap allocations utilizing pooling and recycling instances for all numerical
processing. Special care is also taken around UI given WPFs propensity for doing
lots of heap allocations. The remaining few allocations there are, are small and
ephemeral. A best case scenario for the .NET garbage collector, yet we have
always been seeing occasional longer pause times on .NET Framework 4.8. 

Additionally, we recently switched from running inference on GPU to CPU and saw
an increase in these max pause times. At the same time .NET 6 was just about to
release, and we finally resolved the issues we had with porting to .NET Core/5+.
We, therefore, wondered if running on .NET 6 would provide any improvement to
this? It certainly did, as can be seen below.

![.NET 6 vs .NET 4.8 GC stats]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2021-11-dotnet-6-vs-4.8-gc-stats/net6-vs-net4.8-gc-stats-perfview-compare.png)

These are the **Memory Group -> GCStats** as shown in
[PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview), which was also used to record
GC collection events from the application running both on .NET Framework 4.8 and
.NET 6 on Windows x64. In both cases data was collected for about a few days,
but not exactly the same duration. Max pause times drop from 13.5 ms to 4.9 ms,
which translates to `(13.5-4.9)/13.5 ~= 64%` shorter max pause times!

PerfView supports exporting GC events to a CSV-file. Below plots the suspend and
total pause times in milliseconds (y-axis) for the same time frame in seconds
(x-axis) for .NET 4.8 vs .NET 6. Worst case pause times are all gone!

![.NET 6 vs .NET 4.8 GC events]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2021-11-dotnet-6-vs-4.8-gc-stats/net4.8-vs-net6-gc-events.png)

Zooming in on 600 seconds of GC events provides more detail, as shown below. Not
only do worst case pause times disappear, time between collections/pauses
occuring (while still being shorter) increases by at least 2x. Meaning there are
fewer collections. This I expected given the many performance improvements made
in .NET 6 compared to .NET 4.8. I.e. less string allocations and similar.
However, why did the worst case suspension time drop significantly?

![.NET 6 vs .NET 4.8 GC events zoom]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2021-11-dotnet-6-vs-4.8-gc-stats/net4.8-vs-net6-gc-events-zoom.png)

[Maoni Stephens](https://twitter.com/maoni0) (.NET GC Architect on the .NET
Runtime Team) was kind enough to provide a hint by pointing to the pull request
[https://github.com/dotnet/coreclr/pull/27578](https://github.com/dotnet/coreclr/pull/27578)
which states:

> Change PING_JIT_TIMEOUT constant from 10 milliseconds to 1 millisecond. This
fixes the case where return address hijacking doesn't work quickly, because the
hijacked thread doesn't return (e.g. because it's in a loop doing further
calls). In this case we have to retry the hijack, and changing the timeout
constant makes this happen more quickly.

In short, when a garbage collection has to occur, all managed threads have to be
suspended first. This is also referred to as stop-the-world (STW). 
In [Suspending and resuming threads for
GC](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/suspending-and-resuming-threads-for-gc/)
Maoni Stephens covers how:

> suspension and resumption of threads is not really part of the GC. GC calls
functions to do the suspension and the resumption as a service provided in the
CLR. Other components in the CLR also use this service such as the debugger
implementation. But it’s true that suspending and resuming because of the GC is
the most significant usage of this service.

Suspension is, however, reported as part of the total pause time when a GC
occurs. For more details [Matt Warren](https://twitter.com/matthewwarren) has
written a great blog post about this in [GC Pauses and Safe
Points](https://mattwarren.org/2016/08/08/GC-Pauses-and-Safe-Points/), so I
won't go into details here. For more info on thread hijacking you can also
consult the [BOTR (book of the
runtime)](https://github.com/dotnet/coreclr/blob/master/Documentation/botr/threading.md#hijacking).

In any case, this single letter change, **removing `0` and changing the
`PING_JIT_TIMEOUT` timeout from 10 milliseconds to 1 millisecond, is the best
performance improvement moving from .NET 4.8 to .NET 6** for our specific use
case. Given the many other performance improvements and all the work put into
them, this says a lot I think.

![PING_JIT_TIMEOUT change]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2021-11-dotnet-6-vs-4.8-gc-stats/net6-vs-net4.8-ping-jit-timeout-change.png)

Astute readers will notice this PR was merged on November 2, 2019, and been
available since [.NET Core 3.1 or 5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.NET)
(depending on cutoff date for 3.1). However, I've haven't seen any 
reporting of this change anywhere and completely missed it. So as always
only way to know is to measure. Always measure. 📏

Just so you know, whatever you may think, your likes and retweets are truly
appreciated. I'm using my blog as a way to force myself to write more. Writing
and documenting can be a thankless task. You rarely get any appreciation when
you do make the effort, but always hear about when you didn't 😅, and you are
always busy. Writing in public gives an extra incentive and it's very nice to
know someone out there appreciates whatever you are doing. So thank you. ❤️

PS: Whether the single letter change is responsible for all of the improvement
observed in max pause times here I don't know, so I am perhaps extrapolating a
bit 😉